# My first 200 hours diving a CCR

Nearly 3 years ago, I took my first breath on a Closed Circuit Rebreather (CCR).
Since then I've accumulated 200 hours and started to learn how to use it for the
kinds of diving I do, primarily long dives in hard overhead environments. To say
the time was humbling would be an understatement; there were lots of peaks,
valleys, and plateaus. Just when you thought you had everything figured out, you
ended up taking 2 steps backwards.

During the first 200 hours and 137 dives, I had an average dive time of 86
minutes, and a maximum time of 3.5 hours. Had it not been for a lot of training
dives, and a couple of random trips to the quarries with open water buddies, the
average dive time probably would have increased a bit. Especially recently, I've
been doing a 3-3.5 hour dive on Saturday, and a 2 hour dive on Sunday. I've
generally used a new set of tanks on Sunday, but I usually have more than enough
Gas (O2 and Diluent) left in the LP27s from Saturday to do a 2 hour dive.

All of the first 200 hours were accumulated on a Dive Rite O2ptima with back
mounted counter lungs (BMCL). The first 100 hours or so were in a stock
configuration, and I've started to modify it more recently. Within the next
couple of weeks, I'll be crossing over to the O2ptima Chest Mount (CM or
ChOptima) variant, and have started looking into try dives on other units
(mostly of the sidemount variety). The desire to explore various sidemount CCRs
will be dependent on how well the ChO2ptima works in some of the smaller
passages of the caves.  We'll need to see how well the ChO2ptima performs in
smaller areas of the caves before wandering into sidemount territory.

Sheldon, the BMCL variant, has taken me on my first (and also only) ocean dives,
done some wreck penetration, visited a former lead mine, spent way too much time
in the local quarries, and explored about a dozen caves with linear penetrations
to 3,000 feet. Maybe one day I'll get more time in the Ocean with either Sheldon
or Young Sheldon.

A quick tangent on the naming on Sheldon, as it plays into all of the learning
that has happened. While Sheldon is "Sheldon Cooper" from the Big Bang Theory,
it works that he is into science, a bit geeky and antisocial. As a bonus, in the
show, Sheldon yells Bazinga! at times, mostly as a form of "I'm here" or "I got
you!". Bazinga! would also be relevant and appropriate while learning to dive a
rebreather, and struggling with buoyancy, or even worse hitting the surface.

# CCR Fundamentals

It's probably best here to take a quick tangent and cover some CCR fundamentals
and vocabulary, especially to help out the newer divers or those considering
the world of silent diving.

It should be obvious, but a rebreather utilizes a closed loop that continually
recycles the breathing gas. In order to make this work, we have to be able to do
a couple of things: scrub the CO2 from the exhaled gas and replace the Oxygen we
metabolize. We also have to realize that Oxygen is toxic at depth, so we need
something to add loop volume without using pure Oxygen, and this is our Diluent.
So reading into that a bit more, we need a way to add Oxygen and Diluent to a
closed loop, and also inferred, we need a way to monitor how much Oxygen is in
the closed loop.

With a rebreather, we need 2-3 tanks (depending on the specific rebreather,
configuration, dive profiles, use cases). At a minimum, we need Oxygen, some
form of Diluent (anything from air to trimix depending on profiles and other
factors), and bailout. Why do we need bailout? Well the rebreather is just a
machine, and it can and will eventually fail so we need a means to end our dive
when it does fail. In some cases (like the ChO2ptima), Diluent and Bailout come
from the tank, and we colloquially refer to this as diluout. Now realistically,
I hate only having a single bailout cylinder as when sidemounting it, it's just
awkward and I'd rather have a bit of redundancy, in the form of 2 cylinders. As
an example, if you determine you need 80 cu ft. of bailout, I'd rather take 2
AL40s than a single AL80, but I'm probably just as likely to take 2xAL80s.

As part of the closed loop, you also need some form of a gas buffer for inhale /
exhale and to facilitate scrubbing. This buffer is provided by counter lungs. On
the O2ptima, these counter lungs are back mounted (between you and the wing). We
refer to this as BMCL. Similarly on the ChO2ptima, these are mounted on your
chest.

 * ADV - Automatic Diluent valve; This is a demand valve that functions much
   like a traditional 2nd stage regulator. It is used to add loop volume in the
form of diluent to compensate for depth changes or a loss of gas. So what does
this really mean? Well it means the ADV will automatically add diluent without
you needing to do anything except breather, and as a result your loop volume
constantly fluctuates.

 * MAV - Manual Add Valve; These are used to manually add gas to the loop. They
   can be used for either Diluent or Oxygen (depending on what you need at the
time). These are usually provided via some form of button either push or slide
style. Additionally, you use the diluent MAV for various operations involving
the verification of Oxygen sensors, and in some cases also for removing water
from the loop.

 * BOV - Bailout valve; This is a standard second stage regulator and DSV
   combined. With the turn of a lever or knob, you transition from being on the
rebreather and doing closed loop breathing, to be on traditional open circuit
scuba. In most cases the BOV is plumbed into your "back gas" (aka onboard
diluent)

 * DSV - Diver surface valve; Using a lever, this lets you open the loop and
   breathe (you become part of the closed loop), or close it and well not
breathe. In the case where you have a DSV and you need to bailout, you close the
DSV and switch to a standard second stage regulator from your bailout tanks.

 * iBOV - Integrated Bailout Valve; On the O2ptima, the iBOV combines an ADV, O2
   and DIL MAVs, and a BOV into a single unit.

# So why the O2ptima?

One of the first questions folks ask is which rebreather do I get and why? There
is no right answer to this, and realistically you probably want to try multiple
rebreathers if you can.

I went with the O2ptima primarily because I could get local training for it,
most of the local divers were either already on it or were crossing over to it,
and the local dive shop is a Dive Rite dealer.

## The good and the bad with the O2ptima

Everybody seems to love their rebreather, and it's hard to get the good and bad
on different units. One thing I've learned is it's also an individual decision,
and is driven primarily by the kind of diving you do, your physical size, and
preferences.

### The Good

 Things I really like about the O2ptima:

* The ability to use Micropore cartridges (or loose scrubber)

* Shearwater electronics

* Divecan control bus

* Industry standard and non-proprietary batteries

* The trim pillow (and arguably you could use this wing with other CCRs as well)

* Cave filled LP27s have more than enough gas for 4+ hour dives (without needing
  to turn it on thirds)

* eCCR - Computer controlled solenoid

* Great support

### The Bad

Things I don't like about the O2ptima:

* The requirement to use the stand (makes it hard to use a standard backplate
  and travel with)

* The size - the backmount variant is large in every dimension (length, width,
  and height)

* Heavy! - Ready to dive it's pushing 70# or more with steel LP27s

* Molex connectors on the O2 sensors (fragile)

* 4 O2 sensors is a bit of an expensive gimmick

* Can't use 3L steel bottles (important for travel)

* ADV is integrated into iBov (so if you replace the iBov you loose the ability
  to have an ADV)

* No inline shutoff for the solenoid, and turning off O2 at the regulator and
  having to feather the value to use MAVs would've a pretty big task loading in
an emergency.

# The training

In the first 200 hours, I've qualified to use the O2ptima to depths of 100M, as
well as in caves and for wrecks penetration. The largest learning curve here was
for both the initial (Air Diluent Deco) level, and Mixed Gas (diving to 60M).
Everything else was minor increases in skills, and mostly incremental increases.

Arguably when I did Mixed Gas at 50-60 hours, I was still struggling with some
of the basics, especially buoyancy, so this was a pretty steep learning curve.
If I had to do this again, I would have waited another 50 hours or so, when all
of the pieces started to really click.  One of the more entertaining skills
learned / practiced for the mixed gas level was bottle swaps while decoing on a
lift bag. The goal here was to swap bottles with your buddy when one of you was
bailed out, and simulated having breathed the bottle down to 50%. When we did
the skill I had steel LP50s, and my buddy had AL40s. There was a pretty big
weight shift with the swaps here, and it took some playing to figure out how to
do it.

I ended up repeating the bottle swap drill during full cave with the same
cylinder differences (LP50 and AL40), compounded by both of us having different
rigging on our bottles. The different rigging made it even more entertaining and
just further re-enforced how it's best to have common configurations between
buddy teams, but with that said it's certainly possible to dive in different
configurations it just takes more practice and a higher level of skill. Arguably
this could probably be an argument for the GUE config here. 

One of the more important things you end up learning in Mixed Gas is that dives
to 60M are challenging to plan with only 2 bottles and reasonable bottom times.
Realistically you need 3 bottles (a deep bailout, intermediary deco / ascent
bottle, and something rich to finish deco on). There is a lot of planning that
goes into 60M and deeper dives, as you might expect.

I knew I was getting closer to being ready to do full cave on the rebreather,
when I ended up having to help an open circuit diver fix their cam bands
(sidemount cylinders) while being relatively neutral. I was within a few hours
of 100 hours by this point, but at least I had the confidence to tie in a jump
reel while relatively neutral.

By the time I got to 150 hours, I was feeling more confident and had started to
playing with carrying 3-4 bottles for bailout / deco. I also started to look at
and commit to Advanced Mixed Gas (100M) training, as the biggest new skill there
is the use of 3 or 4 bailout and deco cylinders.

At the end of the day, I have taken the following courses on the rebreather:

* Air diluent deco (the intro level rebreather class and initial training)

* Advanced wreck (wreck penetration)

* PADI Mine Diver (I'm not gonna lie, this was a complete joke and a waste of
  time / money; I could see it potentially being more useful as a follow on to
Full Cave but probably not as a PADI specialty)

* Mixed Gas (60M, Normoxic Trimix)

* Advanced Mixed Gas (100M, Hypoxic Trimix)

* CCR Full Cave

# All the learning

Learning to dive a rebreather was pretty humbling, and filled with a lot of
peaks and valleys. Admittedly, I was a pretty "young" diver when I dove face
first into the world of silent diving, so not only did I have to continue
learning / practicing the fundamentals, but I also had to learn all of the new
skills. During the first 100 hours, every time you would feel like you're
starting to get the hang of things, something would happen and you would end up
taken several steps back, and this cycle repeated many times.

I learned to dive Sheldon initially with the ADV on, but as I would realize this
made it almost impossible to maintain minimum loop volume and buoyancy. It would
be almost 50 hours before I learned to dive with the ADV isolated. Isolating the
ADV greatly simplifies the overall diving, and at least while you're learning
enables you to really get down to minimum loop and better detect depth changes.
Diving without an ADV though complicates things like hot dropping on to a wreck,
dropping into a high flow cave and emergency procedures such as semi-closed
breathing. I've spent the last 150 hours without an ADV, it's going to be a
little strange learning to dive the ChO2ptima with one; but not to worry, the CM
ADV can be isolated you just have to isolate your DIL MAV as well.
Interestingly, I've experienced a partial failure that would have been handled
differently had I had an ADV present. When we get to modifications below, we'll
dig deeper into me not having an ADV at all on Sheldon.

As part of learning to control my buoyancy and maintain minimum loop volume, I
had to learn to set the OPV on the counterlungs. Initially I had been diving
with the OPV fully closed, but I discovered that keeping it fully open helps
keep minimum loop. In most cases, I can keep it fully open unless I have a 3rd
bottle with me, then due to the increased workload I have to close it slightly.
The manual for the O2ptima actually suggests keeping it fully open, unless you
have a higher than normal tidal volume.

With the BM variant of the O2ptima, you end up having a total of 4 different
means of controlling buoyancy, making it challenging to learn how to manage
ascents. You end up having to control your wing, trim pillow, dry suit, and
counter lung volume. It took me almost 100 hours before figuring out I need to
vent my trim pillow and open my drysuit before beginning an ascent. I really need
to go back to Bonne Terre mine, now that I can really control the rebreather and
handle sawtooth profiles.

Before progressing onto Full Cave, I spent a lot of long dives trying to
maintain various depths and working on neutral buoyancy. It turns out Penny
Royal quarry is actually pretty good for working on the basics. This quarry has
a nice ledge at 40' around most of the perimeter giving you a visual reference
for maintaining depth. They also have a huge shallows area that can get really
silty, so it's a good reference to make sure you're not touching the bottom. The
shallow area also has a lot of attractions in a star / loop, making it easy to
really slow down your speed and make sure you're not using speed to compensate
for buoyancy. There are also a lot of areas where you can be just out of view of
the open water classes, but still have something to watch while you're working
on buoyancy. Of course on dives where I had deco, sitting just off the platforms
also gave me more practice with getting close to neutrally buoyant.

Switching to a Nerd, isolating the ADV, and adjusting the OPV made all the
difference when working on buoyancy and minimal loop. Especially with the ADV
isolated, you become rather adept at detecting depth changes.

As part of learning, I've been playing with different tanks for bailout. I'm
super negative to begin with, so with most scenarios and even heavy
undergarments I don't need to add weight.  The various combinations all have
their own place. I can dive AL40s in a wet suit (but it hardly gives you enough
gas / bailout for any kind of penetration or real deco), AL80s work, and I can
dive them without weight but your deco is going to start getting annoying as
they get floaty and pull up on your harness, and at the other end we have cave
filled LP85s which make me more negative than I already am. Tank configurations
I've used:

* AL40s

* AL80s

* Single AL80 (monkey configuration; it's challenging and annoying but sometimes
  it's all you have to work with)

* LP50s (Both cave filled and actually filled to their rated pressure)

* LP85s (Cave Filled)

* LP50s + AL40

* LP85s + AL40

* LP85s + AL80 + AL40 (this is what I have mostly been diving recently,
  especially for longer dives).

It's no surprise that 4 tanks plus the rebreather leaves me super negative, and
really forces you to work on trim / buoyancy.

Similarly, I've played with different tank configurations on the rebreather.
These have mostly consisted of LP27s and AL13s. My default for longer dives is
the LP27s, and generally AL13s for the shorter dives. AL13s start getting a
little light and will start to pull the rebreather off your back around 1500psi.
Similarly, with AL13s I normally have to turn my penetration dives on thirds.

I'm super negative, so gear configuration ends up being pretty important. Part
of that includes playing with different fins. The majority of my dives were done
using Deep6 Eddy fins. The deep six fins are fairly heavy and about 1 double
ender positive. More recently I've been used the Dive Rite Fins, and they are
significantly lighter and maybe even slightly more positive.

One of the more interesting learning experiences came from sending Sheldon in
for service. I failed to take pictures or mark the locations of the counter
lungs, harness, and plate. It took about 6 dives to really get everything back
to how I had it. You can also infer from that, I've played with the positioning
of everything including deco cylinders. I have a configuration that seems to
work pretty well.

A more subtle aspect of the required learning is the gradient factors used on
your Shearwater / controller. Using the default 30/70 gradient factor, on 2-3
hour dives at 95', you were spending 45 minutes or more at 20', and
occasionally getting a "deep" stop at 50' (which in a high flow cave like
Jackson Blue isn't a lot of fun). As I would discover on longer dives and taking
full trimix, 30/70 is super conservative. During Advanced Wreck, we were shown
how to use the Shearwater to look at your "Surface Gradient Factor" (if you were
to surface right now). After checking it at various points during deco on longer
dives, and working various profiles (especially with air diluent on 90-foot
dives), I've settled on 50/85 as GF. It's a bit more aggressive (but interesting
what I had been planning for a bailout scenario anyways, and I've had a computer
explicitly set to 50/85 for bailout for a long time). Using 50/85, I no longer
have deep stops, and I've been getting 30-45 minutes of deco (mostly depending
on if I actually go to 10' for my last stop). I plan to go a bit more
conservative for trimix dives, but certainly not 30/70 (probably something like
40/80 and then pad my 20' stop a few more minutes). 

As my dives started to regularly exceed 2 hours, I started to look at my
setpoint as you start pushing your CNS up pretty high. On a 3-hour dive at a
setpoint of 1.2, you'll end up with a CNS just under 100% which is starting to
get pretty aggressive, especially with a 3,000' swim into a high flow cave. I've
been using 1.1, which gets me out of the water between 80-85% CNS, and doesn't
significantly add to my deco. Using 1.1 on the long swims also helps with toxicity
especially with the increased workload of the long swims.

Definitely a lot to think about on long CCR dives.

Of course, no learning experience would be complete without 2 for real bailout
scenarios. Both were loosely related to the diluent side of the rebreather. On
the first, we were starting to shallow out in the quarry after spending some
time down at at 140' or so. Coming through about 90' (and about as far from the
docks where we started as possible), I started leaking diluent at the MAV. My
buddy turned around just as I was bailing out, and we proceeded up to our first
deco stop. On the ascent I shut down the dil side, and as we started getting to
30' my buddy started pointing to his O2 cylinder and asking if I wanted it (my
deco obligation went from about 15 minutes to 45 minutes on air). Once I had the
dil shut down, it was easy enough to tighten the connection, open the cylinder
and cautiously go back on the loop to finish deco. Of course the surface swim
from that side of the quarry took forever! My second bailout happened in a cave
during training, I ended up blowing an o-ring on the diluent connection. Hey,
whats bailout practice drills for real, right? We would have had to do the
drills whether they were for real or not. I was also present for a buddy who
lost an O2 sensor about 1,000 feet into a cave. We spent a few minutes with him
doing a dil flush and verifying the remaining cells, before he started flying
the rebreather manually and we exited the cave. There have been some other less
entertaining events as well, such as loosing an o-ring on a reg on a bailout
bottle (just another reason to split your bailout between bottles).

# Modifications

Like to tinker, dive side mount. That's not enough tinkering? Then get a
rebreather, plus you can still tinker with sidemount for bailout and/or deco
bottles.

The very first change I made to Sheldon was replacing the HUD with a Nerd. I
can't even tell you how much of a difference this makes! You suddenly have your
depth and deco information right and front of you, and a second computer! The
Nerd is absolutely worth what they get for it. Of course with Young Sheldon I
haven't committed to having a Nerd controller yet, but I should be able to dive
with a Petrel controller and a Nerd for a while. Having 2 Nerds on the ChO2ptima
seems a little excessive.

The next major change I made was switching from the Divesoft iBOV w/ ADV and
MAVs, to a Divesoft DSV with MAVs. On long dives this made a pretty big
difference, as the iBOV is fairly heavy. The downside to this is you no longer
have an ADV in the system (even if it's isolated). I've also played with several
different mouthpieces for the loop.

Somewhere around 175 hours, I (completely) replumbed Sheldon so both Sheldon
and Young Sheldon (my ChO2ptima) have the same connectors for Onboard / Offboard
Dil (QC6), and O2 (standard low pressure quick disconnect). As a bonus, I fixed
what I saw as a short coming with the O2ptima, the lack of an inline isolator
for the solenoid.  Switching my O2 supply to a standard LP quick disconnect was
also partially "required" by the upgraded towers for the CM/BM which makes the
fitting slightly larger. As a result, Dive Rite switched back to the calibration
caps from the OTS / CM, which comes with a LP Quick disconnect fitting (instead
of the LP 2nd stage screw on the that previous BMCL used). 

After a lot of tinkering, numerous hose swaps, hose routings, and lots of
playing with bungee / bolt snaps... I have something that seems to work and is
relatively clean. The QC6 male / female sits right above my waist buckle, and
is clipped off to a sliding d-ring. We've started the process of 3D printing
some parts to help hold the QC6s, and combined with adjustments to hose lengths,
hopefully we have a cleaner solution soon. I also want to go back and put the
check valve on the (male) QC6 from my onboard DIL (but I either need to find a
new check valve or play with adapters / fittings to make it work.

 * Went back to the Divesoft DSV (after having the MAVs rebuilt)
 
 * Replaced the SPGs with transmitters (hint: 6" hoses are too short, 9" works
   better with AL cylinders, not so great with steel cylinders. I've been using
a 9" for the DIL transmitter and a 18" for the O2 transmitter, and keeping it
closer to the Nerd)

 * Removed the bar manifolds below the canister

 * Added a 2-port 'Y' manifold for O2 (Inline isolator to solenoid, LP Quick
   disconnect for Onboard / offboard O2, shorter suppler hose to the MAV)

 * Onboard DIL is fed via a male QC6
 
 * Added a 3-port DIL manifold fed by a female QC6 (MAV, wing, and trim pillow);
Unplug the onboard male QC6 and I can easily offboard (I've had had male QC6s on
my BOs and stages fort a while)

 * No longer have a separate hose for offboard

 * Both the CM/BM have a QC6 female for DIL and LP quick disconnect for O2

Downside (because let's face it, there are always downsides and trade offs)....
it takes a bit longer to gear up and a bit more chest clutter.

# The ChO2ptima Crossover

So funny thing happened here, I dove more than I expected and my crossover
didn't put me at 200 hours. So instead the crossover is happening in a few
weeks.

# Other considerations

If I had easy access to banked 20/20 or maybe even 18/45 trimix, I would use it
almost exclusively for diluent. Something like 20/20 will improve the work of
breathing, and mitigate some of the narcosis effects making 3,000' penetration
dives a bit easier as you'll have a clearer head. Although with most of dives in
the 95' range trimix isn't really required, and not having it prebanked is
enough of a hassle it's not worth it. Having it banked though would encourage me
to use it. Given the chance and if you have easy access to banked 20/20, I'd
definitely do the initial as Deco Procedures + Helitrox if you can.
