My first 50 cave dives have been full of learning, multiple different cave
systems and/or entrances, a variety of conditions including silt outs and flow
so ridiculous you ask yourself why you're even bothering trying to kick into it,
several pinnacle dives, depths to 200+ feet (with suitable gases), and of course
some mistakes.

These dives were performed as a combination of open circuit, CCR, and training.
Similarly, some were solo, some were with an instructor, some were with known
buddies, and some were with random buddies. As you can probably deduce, the
random buddies ranged from "I'd dive with them again" to "Ya, no thanks". Just
like open water, random buddies aren't always a great idea.

# Cave Systems

 * Peacock Springs - Orange Grove
 * Peacock Springs - P1
 * Peacock Springs - P3 (Siphon)
 * Vortex Springs
 * Madison Blue Springs
 * Little River
 * Ginnie Springs - Devil's System (Ear)
 * Ginnie Springs - Devil's System (Eye)
 * Jackson Blue
 * Eagles Nest
 * Bufford Sink - It's at least questionable as a cave, but at 165' you can no
   longer see daylight, you can no longer make a direct ascent to the surface,
   and you're well beyond the established limits for a cavern dive, so.....

9 cave systems, 11 entrances, a siphon (P3), and several dives beyond the locked
gate at Vortex is pretty impressive. The downside of course, is these are by and
large tourist caves, even Eagles Nest and Bufford which are fairly remote, are
pretty well developed.

## Peacock Springs

For being one of the larger cave systems in Florida, I've seen surprisingly
little of this system. I can't wait to explore more of it and experience the
last "Pinnacle" dive. On the P1 side, I've seen about 1200' on the Peanut Line,
and a 100' or so of "lower P1" towards Pothole. On the OG side, I've seen maybe
the first 600'.

P3 is one of the siphons that is routinely dove. I've only seen the first 900'
or so, and none of the side passages or main jumps. Plenty more to explore here.
P3 does have the honor of having "stole" one of my primary reels though.

## Vortex Springs
Here's thing it's a good shake out dive site, but the cave itself isn't even
worth the effort, and diving beyond the gate is just plain sketchy. The tunnel
leading from the cavern down to the locked gate slopes down to ~110' feet and is
largely smooth. There's a smaller branch tunnel / jump just before the gate,
but it's controlled by another group, and also locked. In order to dive beyond
the gate, you need to check out the key from the shop. The gate's lock is a bit
rusted and not the easiest thing to open. Once you unlock it, you're left with a
bit of a predicament, in what do you do? I've normally opened the gate, and
locked the chain, and taken the key with me. Beyond the gate there's a set of
rusty bolt cutters, which I guess would be usable push comes to shove if somehow
you ended up locked beyond the gate; but seriously do you want to be using bolt
cutters in 110 - 120' of water while trying to exit a cave? Beyond the gate it
gets a bit deeper, you can probably find 130' or more if you hang out on the
sides. Immediately after the gate you also have to duck under a minor
restriction, it's a little tight back mount but nothing special. Again though
the cave isn't interesting, so why even bother? Somewhere around 800-1000'
you'll enter an area called the backmount squeeze. Hint: It's called this for a
reason.

## Madison Blue Springs

I've only done 2 dives here, both with open circuit teams and I've only used the
main entrance. The Godzilla circuit and banana room are pretty cool (both have
some minor restrictions back mount), and there's a bunch of side tunnels if I go
back. If you swim the gold line back to about 1200' you'll get the pleasure of
going through the half hitch (restriction) and the restriction immediately
before it, both are doable in backmount but definitely entertaining and they'd
add some time in an emergency exit. When I was here, there was flow, and it was
noticeable but not terrible to kick into.

## Little River

Finding the cave entrance can be interesting if you've never been before, and
there seemed to be evidence of river intrusion back to 1,000' feet or so. I
wasn't lucky enough to have tanic intrusion when I was here, so no awesome
rainbow picture during deco. Like Madison, I only have 2 dives here and both
were solo. On the first day I was here there was almost no flow, so I kicked
back to the well casing at ~2,200' (one of the "Pinnacle" dives). On the second
dive a few days later the flow was up, so I verified both sides of both T's, and
checked out various jumps / circuits including the mud tunnel and short cut
tunnel. The shortcut tunnel is a little suspect as a "short cut", it might be
marginally shorter but it's more curvy and at least when I was there, the flow
is higher then the main tunnel. I'll definitely be going back to Little River.

## Ginnie Springs

I did most of my training here for Full Cave (plus CCR cross over) so I have a
fair number of dives here, but surprisingly I've seen very little of it. I've
done some circuits to the right of the park bench, ending up at the maple leaf,
and I've seen Hill 400 back to the Bats. Additionally, I've done one of the
Pinnacle dives here and kicked back to the Hinkle Restriction (~3,100'). Kicking
back to the Hinkle was brutal, but it's not all that that; by far the coolest
part was seeing the cave change multiple times along the way and the walls
becoming solid black. Along the way to the Hinkle we also saw the jumps to
Sweet Surprise and Mainland, but I was too tired to make the to jump the Sweet
Surprise even though my buddy wanted to. I'll definitely be back to Ginnie
again.

## Jackson Blue

Probably one of my favorite caves, and I have the most dives here. It also
happens to be one of the closest to me and shore accessible, so there's that.
I've been here when there's been almost no flow and I've been here where the
flow here is so strong it really makes you question your sanity of trying to
kick in it at all. JB can be done swimming, but I can only assume a scooter
makes life so much better here; if you're curious it's incredibly difficult to
find a buddy here if you don't have a scooter. Once you get off the gold line,
many of the passages become sidemount only, but that won't stop you from trying
them backmount.

I started with just a long penetration along the gold line, and I've gradually
been adding more complexity (gas planning and navigation). There's a couple of
circuits (with minor restrictions) in the front 700' of the cave, a couple of
accessible siphon tunnels, and lots of areas for side exploration (if you're
brave or at least not backmount). The Gold line T's at ~1,000 feet and ~1,300',
and there are numerous side tunnels on both sides. On the left side you also
have a minor restriction before the line ts back together again. Just past the
2nd T, you'll find King's Canyon (~1,900') which is one of my favorite areas of
the cave so far. You can also do a barely backmount friendly circuit (at times
you'll be on the ceiling and just barely off the deep fine silt floor), the
King's Bypass that comes out at King's Canyon. This circuit ended up being one
of my more complex navigation dives to setup and complete (2 jump reels, 5
cookies, and a clean up swim through King's Bypass). 

## Eagle's Nest

Pretty far off the beaten path, and honestly I've done very little other than
"poke" my head in, but just enough to make me want to consider going back. I've
seen seen a few hundred of it, and I'll definitely be back (seems like the kind
of place you need to devote 3-4 days to, spend a day on the front using a
scooter to drop stages / bailout, and a day at the end for cleanup). No surprise
you need a stupid amount of bailout to do any meaningful penetration here, but
if you're prepared and setup you can easily hit 300'. So the real "Pinnacle"
here other than the Eagle's Nest itself was hitting 200' in a cave.

## Bufford Sink

Great for training, I wouldn't go out of my way to go here regularly after 1 or
2 dives you've seen it all then it's just skills and racking up time.

# Mistakes!

The worst mistake I've made so far was accidentally making a visual jump, 1200'
into Jackson Blue. Coming back down the debris pile at the 2nd T, I missed the
gold line and picked up the line for Zumrick Siphon. I made it about 100 feet
before realizing I was having to kick really hard for what should have been with
the flow, and the line I was following was white, not Gold. Reversing course it
was easy to see where I made the mistake, went back to Gold and was relieved
when I found my cookies 300' later.

I've silted out one of the tunnels in the front portion of JB by failing to
secure a SPG, and dragging it through the mud / silt (one of 4 0-visibility
exits I've had to do).

I've been in numerous side tunnels (at JB), that are not even remotely close to
backmount friendly, and I've had 4 instances where I ended up with several
hundred feet of 0-visibility exit.

# Pinnacle dives

I've done 2 of the 3 "pinnacle" dives...

 * Swam to the well casing at Little River (~2,200')
 * Swam to the Hinkle Restriction at Ginnie Springs (~3,100')

I've also peered inside of the Eagle's Nest, and done some more complex dives
requiring 5 cookies and 2 jump reels (and starting to put me into a T-maze).

My longest CCR dive to date at 3.5 hours also happened on a cave dive. I've also
had multiple (cave) dives where I've "given" myself 60 minutes (or more in a few
cases) of deco.

In general, a lot of my dives have required the use of 4 bailout / deco
cylinders plus Sheldon (my backmount CCR). These have generally consisted of
cave filled LP85s, an AL80 that I've been dropping at ~1200' in JB or 2,000'
feet in Ginnie, and an AL40 of O2 I've been dropping in the cavern.

# Cave Conditions

Everything from almost no flow to flow so strong you seriously question why
you're even trying to kick into it. Even changing flow while you're in the cave.

High water and so tanic that I missed the Ear at Ginnie, hit the river and ended
up downstream.

Lots of restrictions, but not so tight I had to take off gear and just squeeze
through and in some cases destroy visibility.
