The available online maps for Jackson Blue are generally poor for anything more
than a general overview of the general cave layout (although had I not studied
the maps it’s probable, I would have missed the unmarked jump I used to King’s
Canyon on the way into the cave). The commonly available maps do a good job
showing the back of the cave but are not as great for the first 1,000 feet or
so. Larry Hack’s small map available at Cave Adventures is slightly better and
shows some of the jumps, but it doesn’t show various connections between tunnels
or how to get to them, and for extra credit having other divers describe how to
get to various jumps / circuits is a bit eye opening (hint, you’ll get different
answers from different people and it’s one of the reasons it took me so many
dives to figure out where and how to get to the horseshoe circuit).

The following is a brief tour of the front portion of Jackson Blue, location /
description of various jumps, flow, gold line, etc. It’s generally either jumps
I’ve verified or passed and done enough research on (aggregating various dive
reports, blogs, maps, etc.). There are still plenty I haven’t seen yet or
haven’t bothered exploring. I started this adventure with a long swim on the
gold line, and slowly branching out to various jumps and siphons. I've swam back
to about 2,800', and have been gradually extending my exploration. Turns out the
poor maps, high flow and lack of a scooter make it a good learning environment
if you’re into figuring out how to read the cave, experiencing some poor
conditions (probably of your own doing), and work on some more complex
navigation and cave skills. Over the last couple of months, I've taken advantage
of the lower flow to verify both sides of the first 4 ts (all the way back to
the trash room).

It's probably obvious, but swimming in JB is usually the exception, there is a
reason most divers and most real penetration happens on scooters. Realistically,
you’re probably not swimming much past the trash room, as you start racking up
some serious deco and you become pretty bailout limited on a rebreather or start
requiring 2+ stages open circuit. On one trip when the flow was way down, it was
right at 100 minutes to kick back to 2'800' (via the lower route), about 45
minutes for the exit, 45 minutes of deco and a runtime right at 3 hours. I’ve
heard that with a scooter and 2 stages (plus “back” gas) you can see pretty much
see everything on the map.

The main passage is generally very backmount friendly; many of the side tunnels
however, especially in the first several thousand feet are either sidemount only
or become sidemount quickly. There are also various fissures where you end up
swimming sideways through the cracks. I’ve had the fortune of discovering some
of the not so backmount friendly tunnels while you guessed it, in a backmount
rebreather; I’ve made some messes, I’ve had to back out, and some I’ve just
looked at and went not happening.

Most of the main passage (at least once you drop down the chimney), is around
95’ until you get back towards King’s Canyon where it rises to about 80’ (before
dropping back down), and there’s spots beyond King’s Canyon that get up to 60’
or so. It's relatively constant depth but there is definitely a good bit of
sawtooth profile, depending on your dive plan.

There are ‘T’s everywhere! Especially after about 3,000’ off the Gold Line.
Bring a dozen or more line markers with you! Plastic colored clothespins work
great here (although they aren’t the easiest to identify without some work in a
silt out).

# Cavern

The cavern is generally large, although it can get busy. I’ve been in the cavern
with 6 teams doing deco and several classes going on, which makes it pretty
crowded. Similarly, I’ve seen 9 primary lines in place at times, which makes for
an interesting puzzle, especially when some are run better than others. There
are spots where there are not great tie offs.

It’s generally accepted that running primary lines along the right side, and
into / through the deep area is best. Similarly, most folks end up dropping an
O2 bottle in the cavern, either clipped off to their primary or sitting up on
one of the ledges.

The absolute best spot for deco if you can score it, is the ledge above the
venturi / keyhole opening into the cave. It’s right at 20’, you can keep your
feet on the ceiling and the flow exiting the cave keeps you up, plus you have
full visibility into the cavern, the spring basin, and divers exiting the cave.
It’s usually the first spot to be taken though. There are several other ledges
and rock piles that work well, although they tend to be occupied the most by the
serious scooter / stage divers who use it to reorganize their stages, redo
spools, etc.

If the spring is open to the public, the cavern is directly below the diving
board, and it’ll probably surprise you the first couple of times you hear it.

The entrance to the Meg tunnel is on the right of the cavern area at about 20’
(and 1 O'Clock if you're in the hour glass cave entrance).  It’s sidemount only
and it may require equipment removal to even get into it. If you get bored on
deco, it's a good thing to investigate and kill some time.

# Gold Line

The Gold Line starts ~250’ from open water and about 150’ from the cave
entrance, just past the deep area.

Until the second breakdown, the Gold Line generally follows the cave’s right
wall, about 4’ off the bottom. At the second breakdown, the line begins to run
through the center of the cave, until just before the jump to King’s bypass,
where it moves up to the ceiling, before coming back down and occasionally
being buried in silt.

There are only 3 marked (permanent) jumps on the Gold Line before the second
break down, and plenty more that aren’t marked. There is also a set of blue
arrows at the King’s Bypass marking the jump, but they don’t appear permanent so
I wouldn’t rely on them; similarly there has been a non permanent jump around
Chicken Head rock (the area doesn’t look very backmount friendly).

The more time you spend on the Gold Line and especially seeing it from both
directions, the more jumps you’ll start finding. In most cases the jumps aren’t
actually marked but you can usually see them or make educated guesses where they
might be.

# Flow

JB is high flow, and it’s not usual for it to change day to day (or as I’ve
found out, even while you’re in it). I’ve seen it several times where it’s
pretty calm (by JB standards) on one day and kicking pretty good the next (or
vice versa). In general, the flow increases at the second breakdown, and
decreases again around the second ‘T’. You will need to learn how to read the
flow, and expect to do a lot of pull and glide (and especially once you get to
the second ‘T’ there are areas where you can’t actually pull and glide and it’s
all swim). The lowest flow is generally high and off to the sides, I’ve tended
to favor the left side, but that’s not always the best side (just learn to read
the cave). At the second breakdown, I’ve found myself weathervaning on a rock,
trying to figure out how to get over the breakdown. I’ve generally found if you
drop off the second breakdown about 2 body lengths left of the Gold Line, and
then immediately go left, you have the best chance of “surviving” the entrance.
2 body lengths left of the Gold Line still gives you some rock to reach for and
use to finish pulling yourself down. The other option that works well, is about
2 body lengths to the right, it's a little tight but you’ll basically drop over
out of the flow.  Once over the second breakdown, you will probably need to zig
zag across the tunnel to stay out of the flow until you get to the hardish bend
(more going around a corner and continuing in the same generally direction). Of
course, the process of zig zagging while fighting the flow is equally
entertaining.

I’ve checked it a couple of times, from the first ‘T’ back to the base of the
chimney, about 800’ is about 70fpm without kicking with closer to normal flow.
That’s just riding the flow more or less, occasionally with a tangent through
sharp bends, and steering away from the main flow to go over the breakdowns.
While kicking and taking a more direct path, you can probably make 75fpm or a
bit more. On days with much less flow, I've made about 65fpm from 2,800' back to
the cavern.

I've been in JB on days where the flow seems to be perpendicular to the main
tunnel (especially between the first 2 breakdowns and back towards the trash
room). Similarly I've been back by King's Canyon and had to stop and check that
it wasn't siphoning in spots.

I’ve been in Goodman Siphon (doubled back to grab line markers after verifying
the exit / setting the circuit), only to realize the flow had significantly
increased for my second trip through it (the rest of the cave had also
increased, and even kicking back to the 2nd breakdown was a struggle).

# Horseshoe Circuit / Goodman Siphon

The Horseshoe circuit connects to the back of Goodman siphon (this is not
evident from any of the current maps online) and provides an alternate path into
or out of the main level. 

In order to find the Horseshoe circuit, find the Gold Line tie off just before
it starts down the chimney, and tie in your jump reel here (you’ll need ~100’).
You want to stay at ~40’, and head about 11 o’clock to the back of the cave.
This will be just left of parallel to the Chimney. If you can visualize the base
of the chimney, you will end up almost directly over it (just slightly to the
left). From here, the horseshoe circuit goes left and right, and meets at a ‘T’
at the backside of Goodman siphon. The left side can be done backmount, but
you’ll encounter a minor restriction, and have to wiggle a bit to get through
it.  At the ‘T’, there is another minor backmount restriction as you duck under
to enter Goodman Siphon; following the siphon then brings you into the main
tunnel near the base of the chimney. From the “start” of the Goodman siphon
line, you’ll be able to see the base of the chimney and the first jump, but
you’ll still want to run a jump spool or find another way to verify it.

Before you enter Goodman Siphon from Horseshoe, if you look up near the ceiling
you'll find the jump to lost student tunnel. It's a fissure crack and barely
backmount friendly (but it'll drop you out CHicken Head rock).

Goodman Siphon is the first marked jump (double arrows) at the base of the
Chimney. If you’re facing into the cave at the jump, look hard left (9 o’clock)
and move up to about 10 o’clock, that’s the start of the siphon (up the small
sand mound). The siphon is basically swimming only, and there is no real pull
and glide to be had. The siphon starts with a sand bottom and transitions to
clay / silt. Swimming into the siphon is either pretty mild and manageable, or
pretty brutal. You’ll round a bend and go down a silt mount, and back up. As
you’re going up and under the minor backmount restriction you’ll find the ‘T’
for the Horseshoe Circuit.  

# Lost Student Tunnel

This is a fissure crack, that starts in Horseshoe / Goodman Siphon and ends at
Chicken Head Rock. It's silty, and barely backmount accessible. It's also a
fissure crack, so you'll get the joy of swimming sideways because the crack
isn't even wide enough for sidemount.

# Squirrel 

This tunnel is not marked on the Gold line, but it’s easy to find. About 30’
further into the cave than the 1st jump, near the pillar on the right of the
main passage, if you look up and across to the left, you’ll find the entrance to
the tunnel. The ceiling of the tunnel is about 80’ and the floor is about 85’.
If you get to the 2nd marked jump, you went too far (so back up a couple of body
lengths to the pillar). The line in the tunnel starts on the ceiling and moves
down to the floor at the first bend. The tunnel becomes sidemount as it enters
another vertical fissure at about the 1st breakdown.

Try to be a good citizen here and run your jump spool along the floor and up the
wall, not through mid-water (or you might really surprise someone coming over
the first breakdown on exit).

I’ve had the misfortune of silting out this tunnel, and yes, it’s a clay / silt
floor so it took some effort, although less than you might expect. It took about
20 minutes for it to fully clear, but it was an experience exiting the tunnel on
the line in zero viz and pulling my jump spool; the kind of experience you learn
from though so all good.

# The 2nd marked jump

There are 2 different options here, both to the right. Young’s Siphon will start
on a low out cropping on the right, about 20’ from the Gold Line. The other
option is the parallel lines, which will be on the left (either up on the ridge
or the floor). Just be careful here as there are spots where you can touch
and/or see the jumps to both Young’s and the parallel lines.

# Young’s Siphon

It’s relatively short and ends at the top of a sand mound; the line actually
disappears into a sand restriction that can be dug out if you’re feeling extra
adventurous, to get you 20’ further. Most of the siphon is an up and down
(roller coaster), that has some tight spots backmount. There is also a very
tight sidemount / no-mount connection back to Granger’s Rock Garden (just before
the Chimney), that doesn’t seem to be lined (uhhh gee I wonder why?).

# Parallel Lines

The parallel lines get you out of some of the flow, and brings you out on the
1st breakdown, at the 3rd marked jump. Most of the parallel lines is backmount
friendly, there are a few areas where it’s pretty tight and you have to wiggle
(but not quite to a restriction yet). You can see the gold line off to your left
for most of the run. I have a bit of a suspicion (although unconfirmed), there
is a side mount connection to just beyond the 2nd breakdown (I’ve met divers in
that area who seemingly appeared from nowhere and didn’t seem to come over the
breakdown).

# The 3rd marked jump

This is on top of the first breakdown, if you look to the right, you’ll see the
jump for the parallel lines.

# Chicken Head Rock

A pretty neat formation, and there’s a couple of unmarked (but lined) jumps
behind and next to it. Chicken Head Rock is located ~700’ into the cave, on top
of the first breakdown. At Chicken Head Rock, if you look left (almost inline
with it’s head), you’ll see the sidemount (becoming vertical fissure, so swim
sideways)  exit of the Lost Student tunnel. There is also a vertical shaft /
crevice above the Chicken Head, which is sidemount only and supposedly goes up
about 40’ before being too tight to pass.

# Unmarked / Unlined Tunnel @ 2nd Breakdown

Maybe 50’ before the base of the 2nd breakdown, there is a tunnel to the right.
There is no line in it, so either it’s not interesting, it’s fragile or it
doesn’t go very far. The left side of the tunnel is not backmount friendly at
all (I went over there looking for an alternate way over the breakdown). Luckily
the floor here is fine sand and it dissipates quickly ;-p The right side looks
like you could probably pick your way back a bit further backmount. 

# 2nd Breakdown

The flow normally picks up at the 2nd breakdown and stays fairly high the rest
of the cave. Following the Gold line over the breakdown can at times be a real
challenge. I’ve found a couple of options: 1) Move about 2 body lengths to the
right and drop into the duck under; 2) move about 2 body lengths to left, and
drop over and you’ll still have some handholds to pull yourself; 3) Use the jump
behind the rockpile on the left. Using the jump, will get you past the breakdown
and minimize the flow, and just before you get to the next duck under, look
right and you’ll see the Gold Line (doing this route properly takes 2 reels, or
another way to verify your "exit" to Gold line). I wouldn’t go out of my way to
encourage continuing under the duck under, it gets very low and silty. I haven't
personally tried it but there seems to be a couple of possible routes under /
through the breakdown that might be viable (at least side mount if you don't
mind a good squeeze).

As you approach the big pillar, before making the turn to the left, there's a
couple of small circuits. You can jump around the pillar, and explore a bit
behind it (there seemed to be lots of fish back there).

# 1st and 2nd ‘T’

This is basically a left and right route that splits at the 1st ‘T’, and rejoins
on a debris cone at the 2nd ‘T’. Both branches of the ‘T’s are Gold Line.

# C&L Bypass

The jump itself is not marked (although lately there have been several personal
markers there), but just past the 1st ‘T’, you’ll find a line on the right, at
the ceiling leading to it. The floor here is deep fine silt on top of deep clay
and easily stirred up, and if you stir it up you’re making a no vis exit. You
can get fairly far backmount if you pick and choose carefully. There are rumors
there is a long sidemount connection to King’s Bypass / King’s Canyon (my
suspicion is that it’s the 3rd leg of the lower T in King’s Bypass). My
confidence has increased that this route exists, as there are very identifiable
personal markers at the jump to C&L and at the back of King's Bypass. 

Just past the 2nd 'T', you can do a double jump into C&L on the right. Just look
for an area that looks like it might be a tunnel (if you exit the debris pile
and are over mud / silt you went too far). The first jump will take you into a
tunnel almost as large as the main passage. If you go left, you can jump back to
the gold line in a few hundreed feet, and to the right should be C&L. Before you
get to the Gold line, you can take a low jump to the right, which is the
continuation of C&L towards King's Bypass. Its low and very silty, but appeared
at least semi backmount friendly (I turned just before King's Bypass).

# Court’s Squeeze

This is the left side of the first ‘T’. It’s a roller coaster, from 90’ – 60’,
and it ends in a minor backmount restriction to get back out to the 2nd ‘T’. The
restriction itself really isn’t that tight, but it will take some maneuvering to
get through it. This side is definitely prettier, but you’ll burn through a
bunch of DIL and drysuit gas. It’s also where you’ll find the start of Queen’s
Bypass sidemount tunnel. At least when I did this side, the flow was much higher
than the right (I swam both on the same dive).

About 50' before the 'T' and Court's Squeeze, if you look high and to the left,
you'll find a jump that takes you through a slightly larger area and bypasses
the 2nd 'T'. You'll end up about 50' past the 2nd 'T'.

# Zumrick Siphon

The line begins 18" – 2’ from the Gold Line on the floor, and boy is the flow
ever kicking here. I haven’t gone very far, in fact I ended up here by accident
(I turned away from the Gold Line cleaning up my line markers from the 2nd ‘T’
and picked up the first line I saw coming off the debris cone. I made it several
body lengths before realizing I was having to kick hard for somewhere that
should have been with the flow, and I realized the line I was on was white, not
Gold. I turned around and found the beginning of the line where I picked up the
Gold line again, and needless to say I was happy when I started to recognize the
tunnel and found my line marker at the 1st ‘T’. 

# Queen’s Bypass

Queen’s bypass begins closer to the 1st T then the maps show; there are also
several more jumps into it from around King’s Bypass if you keep your eyes on
the Left. It’s intentionally not marked (as far as I can tell) using standard
means. If you go Left at the first T, the jumps to Queen’s is before you go up
the debris cone to Court’s Squeeze; there’s technically a personal marker on the
line you could use to make the jump to the Left, but you can probably make an
educated guess if you study the maps enough (hint: the boulder piles from the
maps are pretty obvious). The jump itself is across open water and giant mounds
of silt, but you’ll see the jump after about 50' if you’re looking. This entrance
to it is called the “Pancake Stack”, and you can just barely squeeze in back
mount if you try enough, but you will make a complete mess in doing so. Just
remember if you get in backmount, you have to get back out (even if it ends up
being zero vis). The "Pancake Stack" resembles a "V", so you get to descend down
the V (after trying multiple spots), worm through it as you ascend the other
side of the "V". You can likely go a good ways backmount but it would be tight
and uncomfortable, there is a lot of duck unders and rolling slides.

As shown on the map, you can jump into Queen's Bypass just past the jump to
King's Bypass and swim it as a small circuit. At the first valley / gap after
King's Bypass, there should be a line arrow. Tie in here, and turn to the left,
follow the left canyon sloping down and you'll hit the jump before you go around
the bend. Queen's Bypass is very similar to King's Canyon (narrow, multilevel
canyon with very deep silt).  The canyon is narrow enough you'll probably make a
bit of a mess regardless of how careful you are. You can get back 100-200'
backmount easily and then it became a bit more gnarly; after you squeeze between
the walls you'll come to a 'T' (the Left side takes you back towards the start
at Court's Squeeze, and the right lets you take a small circuit if you set it up
back towards King's Canyon). It's small and very silty, but I didn't have much
of a problem backmount although I did make a bit of a mess.

# Hall of the Mountain King

Somewhere in here, just before the jump to King’s Bypass, the Gold Line moves up
to the ceiling. There are deep sand / silt piles everywhere, and it stays that
way until the trash room. If you weren’t paying attention, you would stumble
upon the line for King’s Bypass (as the Gold line is now about 5’ above you),
and you might be really surprised when you find yourself in a low silty tunnel.
Most of the floor in this area is deep silt.

There is all sorts of interesting look "leads" on both the right and left here,
most doesn't seem to have obvious jumps in them. At least one of the interesting
leads here is the C&L bypass (about midway).

# King’s Bypass

The jump to King’s Bypass is currently marked with double blue arrows, although
it may only be marked intermittently. The jump itself is at a right angle to the
Gold Line and about 5’ below it. You start out over open water / deep silt and
must cross over (or under) the line before the duck under. At the duck under,
the line follows the ceiling and it’s pretty tight. There were spots I was on
the ceiling and just barely off the fine silt bottom. The passage itself is very
wide, and there appeared to be several areas worth exploring. At the back of the
tunnel, you’ll come to a T that starts to go vertical (into King’s Canyon).
About 12’ vertically, you’ll come across another T and eventually come up to the
line in King’s Canyon.

# King’s Canyon

The jump to King’s Canyon is potentially hard to find, especially as you’re
swimming into the cave, but it is absolutely worth the trip! After you pass the
jump to King’s Bypass you’ll eventually (in 2-300') open up in a room that looks
a bit like a backwards ‘K’. The silt pile will taper off to the left (probably
intersecting Queen’s Bypass if you’re looking at the maps), and the Gold Line
continues to the right (on the long side of the ‘K’. There is a smaller flatish
rock sticking out of the silt here, that anchors the gold line. If you look up
and over the rock "island" on your right, you’ll see the start of the line to
King’s Canyon behind your right shoulder (in the lower part of the ‘K’). Just be
warned here, when you tie into the Gold Line you are on top of a very large silt
pile, and the line is largely on the ceiling! The other option here, there is a
marked jump 50-100’ past the tie in I’ve used, and just before the 2000’ marker.
The marked jump is often buried in the sand (the line moves back to the floor
just past King’s Canyon).  The canyon goes from ~90’ to ~45’ and is absolutely
gorgeous! There are essentially levels above and below the line here, and at the
back of it you’ll find the jump to King’s Bypass and probably C&L bypass.

King’s Canyon is ~1800’ into the cave (more or less at 95’), and it took me ~90
minutes to "swim" there with more normal flow. If you happen to be at JB with
low flow, it’s still a 60 minute swim to the jump to Kings Canyon.

# Memorial Room

About 2,000' feet back, just off the Gold Line there is a collection of plaques
and memorials honoring those who have died (some in caves). If you take the
upper route to the trash room, just before you go down the chimney look about
50' off the Gold Line.

# Trash Room

It is NOT recommended to swim here using the lower route, at least not when the
flow is up. Even when the flow isn't up, it's still pretty funky to swim through
the lower route (I've had the flow push me towards King's Canyon on exit and try
to pull me into "man won't fit land" past the rabbit hole).  The lower route is
also not recommended for backmount as you’ll hit a restriction (similar to
Court's Squeeze, you'll be just off the rocky / sandy bottom and touching the
ceiling to get through, and you'll probably have to do some pull and glide) at
the Rabbit’s Hole. The lower route takes you down a silt pile (where the gold
line is mostly buried – but to be fair the line is buried just as much on the
upper route), and there is no chance of pull and glide short of maybe
spidermanning on the ceiling). The flow is like a fire hydrant coming out of the
Rabbit Hole, and the Rabbit Hole itself is a restriction for backmount
(about half the size of the Court’s Squeeze). I actually have swam the lower
route when the flow was down, just to verify the Ts. The flow can get a little
funky going through the Rabbit Hole. It's not as tight as you might think, but
it's definitely easier with a scooter (sic). Once through the Rabbit Hole,
you'll probably need to do some pull and glide and read the cave until you get
to the 4th T.

The route using the lower route is: Right at the 1st and 2nd ‘T’s and Left at
T 3. The Upper route is all Rights at the first 3 ‘T’s. The upper route goes
up a sand pile before entering a rocky section (with increasing flow). You’ll
find yourself up at 60’ before dropping down the chimney into the trash room.
The chimney into the trash room would be pretty gnarly in a 0-viz exit, and you
would probably end up playing bumper pool with the walls and ascending to 60’ or
higher before dropping back down the silt pile. Once you enter the trash room
from the upper route, the line immediately disappears into a line trap, and
reappears a few feet later. If push came to shove here, you can just barely see
the gold line for the lower route on the other side. The upper and lower routes
come together at a "Stop Light" and "Fire Extinguisher". 

Past King’s Canyon the line is often is buried in the sand, and this may include
the T for the upper and lower routes.

Once in the trash room, the landscape of the cave changes and the flow seemed to
increase. Pull and Glide is not recommended in the trash room, as there is
broken glass everywhere.
